---
layout: post
title: Command Line Basics (with the Bash shell)
---

# Command Line Basics

This is an evolving list of basic commands for working on the Unix command-line with the Bash shell.

## Navigating

### Locations

- `/`. The *root* of the filesystem.
- `~`. Your *home* directory, *e.g.* `/Users/yourUserName`.
- `../`. One level up from wherever you are in the filesystem hierarchy. (see below)

### Locations

- `pwd` "print working directory". Tells you where you are in the filesystem hierarchy.
- `ls` "list". Tells you what files and directories are present at your current location in the filesystem hierarchy.
- `cd …` "change directory …". Change directory. Takes an *argument*. `cd ~` changes to your *homer* directory. `cd ~/Desktop` changes to the Desktop directory inside your home directory.
- `cd ../` "change directory up one level". For example, `cd ~/Desktop` will take you to `/Users/yourUserName/Desktop`. After that, `cd ../` will take you to `/Users/yourUserName`.
- `cd -`. Takes to to the *previous location*, where you were befor the most recent `cd` command. Takes you "back".

## Working with files and programs

- Command `less [filename]`. Gives a quick look at the contents of a file; exit `less` by hitting the `q` key.
- Command `which [name]`. Asks if a program names `[name]` exists and is known to the computer. Try it with `which git`, to confirm that you have Git installed.

## Get Out of Jail

If you seem stuck in any way hold down the `control` key and type `c`. This is often represented as `ctrl-c` or `^c`. 